---
description: 'Learn about the increasing need for digital autonomy in an interconnected world, and how IOTA endeavors to achieve this through a decentralized, global infrastructure of trust.'
keywords:
  [
    'digital autonomy',
    'DLT',
    'interoperability',
    'decentralization',
    'IOTA 2.0',
    'value extraction',
    'global programmable infrastructure',
  ]
---

# Digital Autonomy

The world is becoming increasingly digitized. The internet has changed from being mainly a data transport layer, to a
collection of devices and machines working in synchrony to support various industries. As a result, applications are
required to become increasingly interoperable. In addition, an ever-increasing amount of aspects our life migrates
towards digital platforms, where their representative data are governed by different entities.

To allow platforms and applications to become fully interoperable, the world needs a collaborative system where all
parties can maintain a common state. This shared truth ensures consistency, validity, fairness, and efficiency, as every
participant operates based on the same set of information. In our digital age, where interactions transcend geographical
borders and traditional jurisdictions, this demand for a universally accepted and transparent system is becoming
paramount.

The advantages of such a system are manifold. A common state provides uniformity and simplifies integration, ensuring
all participants are “on the same page.” This shared state, when decentralized, offers resilience against systemic
failures, transparency for all operations, and a clear audit trail, essential features in an interconnected world.

Distributed Ledger Technologies (DLTs) have evolved in response to the increasing demand for collaborative computation
and interoperable applications. Through consensus mechanisms, all participants in a DLT network agree upon a single
version of the truth, resulting in a shared, synchronized, and decentralized state.

However, realizing this vision of global interoperability is not without challenges. Technical barriers, governance
issues, and security concerns must be addressed. Yet, given the pace of technological progression, the growing need for
decentralized trust systems, and the intrinsic benefits of a globally accessible, common state, the emergence of a
DLT-based interoperability layer seems not only plausible but inevitable.

## What is Digital Autonomy

A global state, with its vast reach and interconnectedness, can become an instrument of surveillance, manipulation, and
control. Intertwined with the lives of the global populace, such a system can be used to extract value from various
sectors of the economy. Without safeguards, individuals can find their every action, no matter how trivial, is tracked
to influence their behaviors and beliefs. In such a landscape, personal agency is diminished, and users are constantly
swayed by hidden algorithms and centralized decisions. This unchecked power can also lead to digital monopolies,
censorship, and centralization of wealth as markets using this interoperability layer are sapped with fees.
Alarmingly, many DLT projects are sacrificing the core tenets of decentralization for expediency and profit. Some DLTs
are controlled through an oligopoly of block producing validators, and others require high-powered and prohibitively
expensive hardware to run a node. To see how tyranny could rise in many blockchains, one only needs to look at the
extent MEV dominates DeFi, the one current application of DLTs.

Digital autonomy is the ability of individuals to control their online identities, data, and digital interactions. It
mirrors traditional notions of liberty in the digital realm, ensuring that our online experiences are as free from
manipulation and external control as possible.

In the ever-expanding digital universe, safeguarding digital autonomy becomes imperative. The unchecked rise of
centralized platforms has led to myriad issues ranging from data breaches to algorithmic biases to value extraction.
Digital autonomy pushes back against these challenges, ensuring individuals have the power and means to control their
digital footprint.

For a DLT to rise as the global system preventing monopolies of power, it must be designed to champion digital autonomy.
A truly global and universally accepted system cannot merely provide technical solutions. It needs to resonate with the
core values and aspirations of its vast user base. By preserving every user’s digital autonomy, the DLT not only earns
trust but also facilitates widespread adoption. It becomes not just a platform, but a foundational pillar for our future
digital interactions, a cornerstone for the next era of digital collaboration, and the embodiment of the principles of
freedom and self-determination in our increasingly interconnected world.

## What IOTA Seeks to Achieve

IOTA endeavors to bring digital autonomy to everyone by building a global programmable infrastructure of trust. We seek
a secure, easy to use system, which allows applications to interact seamlessly, a system that is accessible to users,
where they are protected from value extraction by intermediaries. We seek a system processing a high volume at high
velocity, that can handle global traffic with as little friction as possible. IOTA 2.0 represents the next step of the
IOTA protocol in our journey to reach these aims.
